15650959	O'Farrell Community School	The O'Farrell Charter Schools is a network of college-preparatory charter schools in the Skyline-Encanto area in San Diego, Southern California. Often defined as schools within a school, O'Farrell operates under and charters an elementary (K-5), middle (6-8), high (9-12) and online (6-12) school. The school opened its doors in the San Diego Unified School District in 1959 with its name chosen in 1957 as Mabel E. O'Farrell Junior High. It was voted to become a charter school in 1994. President Bill Clinton made a visit to San Diego in 1995 to sign the Goals 2000 education bill and to visit O'Farrell because it was a charter. It was also mentioned in Hillary Clinton's book It Takes a Village. == Schools within a school == thumb|O'Farrell Elementary occupies buildings 400 and 500 at OCS. O'Farrell is divided into four of their current western academies as we know them today, * The O'Farrell Elementary School * The O'Farrell Charter Middle School * The O'Farrell Charter High School * Ingenuity Charter School In the mid-to-early 2010s, "Ingenuity Charter School, Blended Learning Independent Study Program" was added as an official O'Farrell charter school. Students will attend in person at the two Ingenuity rooms located on the middle school campus, only on two weekdays of the student's choice, the rest being done independently and online. Ingenuity, the middle school and the elementary are on the "same campus", the campus being called by the organization's former name, The O'Farrell Charter School campus. The O'Farrell Charter High School is located on a different campus and different address. (6150) The elementary school's main opening is located on the intersecting street. (61st St) Each school has a principal and vice principal and has a separate program, teachers, and bell schedules. In the late 2000's, a new school was added for independent, mostly online classes called Ingenuity Charter. ==Notable alumni== *Rosalie Hamlin known for 1960 song, "Angel Baby" *Tom Waits claimed to have attended this school and remembered it as an all-black school in a 1973 interview. *Shirley Horton, California assemblywoman and former mayor of Chula Vista ==References== Category:Schools in San Diego Category:Charter K-12 schools in California Category:Educational institutions established in 1959 Category:1959 establishments in California Category:San Diego Unified School District