1916268	O mein Papa	"" is a nostalgic German song, originally as related by a young woman remembering her beloved, once-famous clown father. It was written by Swiss composer Paul Burkhard in 1939 for the musical (The Black Pike), reproduced in 1950 as Das Feuerwerk (The Firework) to a libretto by Erik Charell, Jürg Amstein, and Robert Gilbert. In 1954 that musical was turned into the film Fireworks with Lilli Palmer. The song was recorded in English as "Oh! My Papa" by a number of artists, including Eddie Fisher whose version was a number one hit in the US in 1954. ==Recordings== An instrumental version of "Oh, mein Papa" was released by trumpeter Eddie Calvert in late 1953. It topped the UK Singles Chart in 1954, and was also a Top 10 hit in the United States. Calvert's version was the first UK number one hit recorded at Abbey Road Studios. The song returned to Abbey Road when Brian Fahey conducted an instrumental version in 1960, to be used as a backing track for Connie Francis' English-Yiddish recording for her album Connie Francis Sings Jewish Favorites. Francis overdubbed her vocals in Hollywood. In June 1966, Francis overdubbed the same playback once more, this time with the original German lyrics for her German concept album Melodien, die die Welt erobern. It was adapted into English by John Turner and Geoffrey Parsons under the title "Oh! My Pa-Pa". A recording by Eddie Fisher with Hugo Winterhalter's orchestra and chorus that was made at Webster Hall, New York City, was released backed with "Until You Said Goodbye". It was released by RCA Victor Records as catalog number 20-5552 (in US) and by EMI on the His Master's Voice label as catalog number B 10614\. It debuted on the Billboard chart on December 12, 1953, and this recording became a No. 1 hit on the U.S. Billboard chart in 1954. Fisher's version also made the UK Top 10; thus, in the UK, Calvert's version was number one in the UK while Fisher's made the top 10, but missed the top spot, and in the U.S., the opposite occurred. The song has been performed and recorded by numerous artists since its debut, including Lys Assia,"Eurovision's one hit wonders singing their way to fleeting fame" by Troy Lennon, The Daily Telegraph Australia, 22 May 2015 Siouxsie and the Banshees (on Join Hands (1979), as "Mother/Oh Mein Papa"), Björk (on Gling- Gló, as "Pabbi minn"), and many others. The opening stanza was momentarily quoted in Frank Zappa's song "Billy the Mountain" (1972) in place of the word "fissure", a reference to Eddie Fisher. The song was in the episode "Like Father, Like Clown" of The Simpsons sung by Krusty the Clown. ==Lyrics== ===English lyrics=== Oh, my Papa, to me he was so wonderful, Oh, my Papa, to me he was so good. No one could be so gentle and so lovable, Oh, my Papa, he always understood. Oh, my Papa, so funny, so adorable, Always the clown so funny in his way. Oh, my Papa, to me he was so wonderful, Deep in my heart I miss him so today. Gone are the days when he would take me on his knee And with a smile he'd change my tears to laughter. ===German lyrics=== The original German version of the song contains passages that more fully give the context to the listener; these don't appear in the English translation. It contains grammar errors (confusing masculine and feminine nouns and adjectives) and is sung with a foreign accent appropriate for the role of the Eastern European woman it is written for. Papa wie ein Pfeil sprang hinauf auf die Seil, eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp. Er spreizte die Beine ganz breit auseinand', sprang hoch in die Luft und stand auf die Hand. Eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp. Er lachte: "Haha, haha" und machte: "Hoho hoho", ganz sachte: "Haha haha" und rief: "Eh la hopp, eh la hopp eh la hopp, eh la hopp eh la hopp." Er ritt auf die Seil ganz hoch in die Luft eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp. Das konnte er machen zwölfmal in ohne Müh'; er lachte dazu und fürchtet sich nie. Eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp. Refrain: Oh, mein Papa war eine wunderbare Clown. Oh, mein Papa war eine große Kinstler. Hoch auf die Seil, wie war er herrlich anzuschau'n! Oh, mein Papa war eine schöne Mann. Ei, wie er lacht, sein Mund, sie sein so breit, so rot; und seine Aug' wie Diamanten strahlen. Oh, mein Papa war eine wunderbare Clown. Oh, mein Papa war eine große Kinstler. Hoch auf die Seil, wie war er herrlich anzuschau'n! Oh, mein Papa war eine schöne Mann. Dann warf er sechs Bänder hoch in die Luft eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp. Er ließ sie tanzen im feirigen Licht und strahlte glicklich im ganzen Gesicht. Eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp. Er lachte: "Haha, haha" und machte: "Hoho hoho", ganz sachte: "Haha haha" und rief: "Eh la hopp, eh la hopp eh la hopp, eh la hopp eh la hopp, eh la hopp eh la hopp, eh la hopp." Er warf die sechs Bänder hoch in die Luft eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp. Und alles das macht er auf schwindlige Heh; Papa war die Clou von die ganz Soirée. Eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp, eh la hopp eh la hopp, eh la hopp eh la hopp, eh la hopp. Refrain, Lilli Palmer, in the 1954 film Fireworks Papa, like an arrow, jumped up onto the ropes. Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop. He spread his legs apart very wide, jumped high into the air, and stood on his hand. Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop. He laughed, "haha, haha" and went, "hoho, hoho" very gently, "haha, haha" and shouted, "Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop." He rode the ropes very high in the air. Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop. He could do that twelve times, effortlessly. At this, he laughed and was never afraid. Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop. Refrain: Oh, my Papa was a wonderful clown. Oh, my Papa was a great artist. High on the ropes, how wonderful it was to watch! Oh, my Papa was a beautiful man. Oh, how he laughed, his mouth so wide, so red; and his eyes shined like diamonds. Oh, my Papa was a wonderful clown. Oh, my Papa was a great artist. High on the ropes, how wonderful it was to watch! Oh, my Papa was a beautiful man. Then, he threw six ribbons high in the air. Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop. He made them dance in the glowing light, and beamed with happiness all across his face. Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop. He laughed, "haha, haha" and went, "hoho, hoho" very gently, "haha, haha" and shouted, "Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop." Then, he threw six ribbons high in the air. Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop. And he does all of that at dizzying heights, Papa was the highlight of the whole soirée. Alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop, alley-oop. Refrain ==See also== *List of UK Singles Chart number ones of the 1950s *List of Billboard number-one singles of 1954 ==References== ==Further reading== * Category:Songs about fathers Category:Songs about clowns Category:Songs about nostalgia Category:1950 compositions Category:1953 singles Category:Eddie Fisher (singer) songs Category:Number-one singles in the United States Category:UK Singles Chart number-one singles Category:Songs with lyrics by Geoffrey Parsons (lyricist) Category:Songs with lyrics by John Turner (lyricist) Category:German songs Category:Songs written by Paul Burkhard