41406543	O Rebu	O Rebu (Literally English: The Fuss, International Title: The Party) is a Brazilian late night telenovela written by George Moura and Sérgio Goldenberg (based on Bráulio Pedroso's original story) and directed by José Luiz Villamarim. O Rebu's plot is loosely based on the 1974 telenovela of the same name, featuring an innovative narrative: the whole story takes place in 24 hours. The series premiered on Monday, July 14, 2014 on a special time at 10:30 p.m. (BRT/AMT) on Rede Globo. A total of 36 episodes of 35 minutes were produced. O Rebu aired 4 episodes per week, Monday to Friday (minus Wednesday due to the 2014 Football season games broadcast) at 11:15 p.m. (BRT/AMT). Patrícia Pillar, Tony Ramos, Sophie Charlotte and Daniel de Oliveira star as the protagonists, while Cássia Kis and José de Abreu star as the antagonists. == Plot == A luxurious reception is interrupted when a body is found floating in the pool. One thing is certain: the murderer is among the high society guests. The businesswoman Angela Mahler (Patrícia Pillar) is the party hostess celebrating her recent business success. She shares the spotlight with Duda (Sophie Charlotte), her “daughter at heart”, and the contractor Braga (Tony Ramos), her business partner and nemesis. The celebratory mood is threatened by the arrival of Bruno (Daniel de Oliveira), an ambitious young man who became involved with Duda in order to gain access to confidential information from Angela's and Braga's companies—he knows he can use his power over her to achieve whatever he wants. The guests have their own issues to solve as well such as betrayals, secrets, and cunning moves. The event ends up bringing enemies together under the same roof, like a powder keg ready to explode. All of a sudden, Bruno's body is found, and what was once a party quickly becomes the scene of a despicable crime. Thus begins a frantic search for the murderer in an investigation led by the police officer Pedroso (Marcos Palmeira) and Rosa (Dira Paes), his right-hand woman. Trapped in the house and under the investigators’ crosshairs, all the guests are suspects. Who could be behind this mystery?Globo - The Party == Cast == Actor Role Patrícia Pillar Angela Mahler Tony Ramos Carlos Braga Vidigal Sophie Charlotte Maria Eduarda Mahler (Duda) Daniel de Oliveira Bruno Ferraz Cássia Kis Magro Gilda Rezende José de Abreu Bernardo Rezende Marcos Palmeira Nuno Pedroso Dira Paes Rosa Júlio Andrade Oswaldo Jesuíta Barbosa Alain Vera Holtz Vic Garcez Camila Morgado Maria Angélica Mariana Lima Roberta Camargo Maria Flor Camila Eucir de Souza Brandão Jean Pierre Noher Pierre Cláudio Jaborandy Severino César Ferrário Adão Laura Neiva Betina Val Perré Zé Maria Bianca Müller Mirna Anna Cotrim Lourdes Antônio Fábio Nilo Elea Mercúrio Ludmila Rodrigo Angel Canetti Níkolas Antunes Fininho Olívia Torres Valentina Rezende Luciana Brites Ana Paula Miguel Arraes Michel Rezende Nicola Lama Stefano Giorgio Hossen Minussi Alfredo Anna Tokiko Magda Marcelo Torreão Antenor Nando Brandão H.D. Bel Kowarick Lídia Vidigal Michel Noher Antônio Pablo Sanábio Kiko Vinícius de Oliveira Eduardo Bernadete Araújo Júlia Dyego Menezes João Rodrigo Angel Canetti == Ratings == Aired in the 11 pm time slot in Brazil, The Party was seen by 24 million people. In the last month in which the miniseries aired, more than one million mentions were recorded on a social network. The show also hit the small screens in Portugal (SIC) and was among the top 20 most watched programs in the country.Globo’s miniseries ‘The Party’ is licensed to ten countries ==Broadcast== Country TV network Local title Series premiere Series finale Weekly schedule Timeslot TV Globo O Rebu July 14, 2014 September 12, 2014 Monday to Friday 23:15 SIC O Rebu July 28, 2014 September 19, 2014 Monday to Friday 23:45 Ecuavisa Party 2016 2016 Monday to Friday 22:45 == References == == External links == * * Category:2014 telenovelas Category:TV Globo telenovelas Category:2014 Brazilian television series debuts Category:2014 Brazilian television series endings Category:Brazilian thriller television series Category:Portuguese-language telenovelas Category:Television shows set in Rio de Janeiro (city)