43127764	O'Shaughnessy's chameleon	O'Shaughnessy's chameleon (Calumma oshaughnessyi) is a species of chameleon, a lizard in the family Chamaeleonidae. The species is endemic to Madagascar. It was named after the British poet and herpetologist Arthur O'Shaughnessy.Calumma oshaughnessyi | The Reptile DatabaseBeolens, Bo; Watkins, Michael; Grayson, Michael (2011). The Eponym Dictionary of Reptiles. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. xiii + 296 pp. . (Calumma oshaughnessyi, p. 197). ==Distribution and habitat== O'Shaughnessy's chameleon has a geographic range of about 18,000 square kilometers (6,950 square miles) throughout the southeastern portion of the central highlands of Madagascar. Its distribution extends from Tsinjoarivo, Ambatolampy in the north to Andohahela National Park in the south. The species is highly dependent on intact, humid forest as its habitat, living in lower densities on selectively logged territories.Calumma oshaughnessyi (O'Shaughnessy's Chameleon) at The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. ==Description== O'Shaughnessy's chameleon, being closely related to Parson's chameleon, is similar in shape and color but slightly smaller. Albert Günther, the first to scientifically describe the species, stated that the type specimen is a male measuring 15.5 inches (39.4 cm) in total length, including its tail which is 9 inches (22.9 cm) long. It is mostly brownish gray, with a darker throat and jaw.Günther A (1881). "Seventh Contribution to the Knowledge of the Fauna of Madagascar". Annals and Magazine of Natural History, Fifth Series 7: 357-360. ("Chamæleon O'Shaughnessii ", new species, p. 358). (at Biodiversity Heritage Library). Although lacking horns, the male of the species has a short, bony structure on the snout. The female does not have this structure. ==Behavior== During a 1997 study, researchers discovered that adult O'Shaughnessy's chameleons are most active in the morning and the evening. ==Conservation and threats== Although in some places common, O'Shaughnessy's chameleon is severely threatened. Its populations are declining and fragmented, and the species is ranked as vulnerable by the International Union for Conservation of Nature. Although reports of illegal trade in the species do exist, its primary threat is habitat loss, such as logging and deforestation. While significant populations do exist in protected areas, further loss of inhabitable terrain could fragment and isolate these communities. ==References== Category:Calumma Category:Endemic fauna of Madagascar Category:Reptiles described in 1881 Category:Taxa named by Albert Günther