48529603	O'Lampia Studio	O’Lampia Studio Inc. is an architectural lighting design firm based in New York City specializing in handcrafted lighting fixtures. It has been called the “thinking man’s lighting studio” by The New York Times.The New York Times, "Trade Secrets; Let There Be Lighting" by Patricia Leigh Brown, March 19, 1998. Showrooms are located at 155 Bowery and in the D&D; Building in NYC. == History == O’Lampia was founded in 1993 by South Korean-born Kwang Sung Lee, a fine artist and lighting designer who received his MFA from Pratt Institute. "Kwang" in Korean means “light.” O’Lampia's name is a nod to Manet's painting Olympia (pronounced o-LAM-pia in French) and is a combination of the words “O!,” “lamp,” and “utopia.” Lee's design philosophy is a modern & contemporary take on traditional structures, expressed through simple, graceful lines. O’Lampia started as a local store serving New York and the surrounding metropolitan area but has grown to include international clients. Its lighting fixtures now feature in homes, restaurants, hotels, and educational institutions throughout the United States, Europe, and Asia. == Recognition == Lee's designs have been featured in The New York Times, Wall Street Journal,The Wall Street Journal, "Lights Out on the Bowery" by Maya Pope- Chappell, August 9, 2011. Architectural Digest, Elle Décor,Elle Decor, "Meg Ryan Hits the Beach", June 2010. Interior Design,Interior Design, "Mark Zeff Gives New Life to a 19th Century Town House". and Time Out.Time Out New York, "Lights Fantastic" by Peter Terzian, Issue No. 83. O’Lampia has been an exhibitor in the Architectural Digest Home Show and awarded “Top Pick” in the 2012 Architectural Digest Home Design Show's ASID (American Society of Interior Designers) NY Metro Top Picks Design Competition.Design: The ASID NY Metro Magazine, p. 51, Summer 2012.Architectural Digest, "Top Pick Award from the 2012 Architectural Digest Home Design Show" It was also featured in "The Best Furniture and Accessories from the Architectural Digest Home Design Show" in 2014 by Architectural Digest.Architectural Digest, "The Best Furniture and Accessories from the 2014 Architectural Digest Home Design Show" O'Lampia was also mentioned in The Curious Shopper's Guide to New York City: Inside Manhattan's Shopping Districts by Pamela Keech."The Curious Shopper's Guide to New York City: Inside Manhattan's Shopping Districts" by Pamela Keech. In New York, O’Lampia's work is on display in multiple hotels such as Affinia Manhattan and Cipriani, restaurants including Porter House New York in the Time Warner Building, retail shops including Club Monaco, and educational institutions such as Fordham University and New York University. == References == == External links == * Official Website * The New York Times: "Trade Secrets; Let There Be Lighting" * The Wall Street Journal: "Lights Out on the Bowery" * Elle Decor: "Meg Ryan Hits the Beach" * AD Editors' Top Picks from the 2012 Architectural Digest Home Design Show * The Best Furniture and Accessories from the 2014 Architectural Digest Home Design Show Category:Lighting brands Category:Companies based in New York City