5053492	O Sweet Saint Martin's Land	"O Sweet Saint Martin's Land", also known by its French title, "" ("Saint Martin, So Pretty"), is the bi-national song of Saint-Martin / Sint Maarten island, an island divided between the French Republic and the Kingdom of the Netherlands. It was written in English (the main language of Saint Martin) by Gerard Kemps in 1958. Kemps also wrote and composed a French version with its own lyrics and a different tune. == History == After being appointed as priest for the Catholic Church of French St-Martin in 1954, Father Gerard Kemps felt compelled to compose lyrics and a melody about the beauty of the land of Saint Martin. In 1958, Kemps created "O Sweet Saint Martin's Land". Because of the message the lyrics conveyed and the melody that carried the tune, it served the purpose of a national song. In 1984, on the occasion of the Dutch Queen's Birthday, Kemps was knighted in the Order of Orange-Nassau. Although there are some now on St. Martin who are unaware of Kemps, his legacy lives on in the St. Martin's song. A wide-hole 7-inch vinyl recordText and melodies : Rev. G. Kemps C.S. SP. Eindredaktie in samen werking met Tony Vissenberg. Originele opname : Arno Peterson St.Marteen with the R.C. Choir of Marigot. Eindbewerking : Studio Theelen, Munstergeleen Holland. Soloists : Rev. Kemps x Hélène. Jacket design : Jesus x Tony (made in the Netherlands) was issued by Kemps & the Marigot Catholic Church choir. == Lyrics == === English version === I Where over the world, say where, You find an island there, So lovely small with nations free With people French and Dutch Though talking English much, As thee Saint Martin in the sea? O sweet Saint Martin's Land So bright by beach and strand With sailors on the sea and harbours free Where the chains of mountains green Variously in sunlight sheen 𝄆 Oh I love thy Paradise, Nature beauty fairly nice 𝄇 II How pretty between all green Flamboyants beaming gleam Of flowers red by sunlight set Thy cows and sheep and goats In meadows or on roads Thy donkeys keen I can't forget III Thy useful birds in white Their morn and evening flight Like aircraft-wings in unity Their coming down for food Then turning back to roost Bring home to me their harmony IV Saint Martin I love thy name In which Columbus' fame And memories of old are closed For me a great delight Thy Southern Cross the night May God the Lord protect thy coast! === French version === French original English translation I Find me a pearl so dear, as the island of St. Martin in the sea, chain of hills and valleys; rich golden brown beaches giving peace, give the rest in its bleak and all its waters. 𝄆 St. Martin, St. Martin, So pretty in all its corners. 𝄇 II What his flamboyant charm, their enchanting flowers, a whole bunch of flames. When the sun comes here, giving splendor, showing beauty, What splendor on all sides. III Its top "Pic Paradis", delights tourists here, hence its green works wonders; an unparalleled panorama, Seeing the plains, seeing the sea, colored blue and green. IV Flight of its pelicans, graceful and elegant when they hover high into the air, when they dive into the sea; Tell me the place where we see them, when based on their prey V His name always St. Martin Will in the never ending story, Christopher Columbus discovered it, gave it its name so dear, Patron god, God of goodness, guard it well in prosperity! == Notes == == References == ==External links== * . Category:North American anthems Category:National symbols of Sint Maarten Category:National symbols of the Collectivity of Saint Martin Category:Saint Martinois culture Category:1958 songs Category:French anthems Category:Dutch anthems