54548258	O Fim do Mundo (TV series)	O Fim do Mundo is a Brazilian telenovela produced and displayed at the time of 20 hours by TV Globo, May 6 to June 14, 1996 in 35 chapters. Written by Dias Gomes with collaboration of Ferreira Gullar, with general direction of Paulo Ubiratan and Gonzaga Blota and core direction of Paulo Ubiratan. He had José Wilker, Paloma Duarte, Maurício Mattar, Paulo Betti, Guilherme Fontes, Vera Holtz, Patrícia França, Marcos Winter, Bruna Lombardi and Lima Duarte in the main roles of the plot. It was resubmitted between August 15 and September 29, 2000, just for the Distrito Federal, shortly after a presentation of Jornal Nacional, while not the rest of Brazil, was the presentation of free election time. == Production == Dias Gomes wrote the text to be presented as a miniseries but, because of the number of chapters, 35, and the traditional time at which it was presented at 8 pm, it was released as a mininovel, although it was in practice a miniseries. This was due to the fact that the predecessor novel, Explode Coração, was shortened in 2 months, at the author's own request, and her successor, O Rei do Gado, was not fully prepared. For the first time in a novel, objects and virtual animals were created on three computer platforms. For the recordings of the cataclysm a model was made, ten times smaller than the scenic city, which had 35 thousand square meters. == Cast == Actor Character Paulo Betti Joãozinho de Dagmar José Wilker Sebastião Socó (Tião) Bruna Lombardi Gardênia Lima Duarte Coronel Hildazário Junqueira Ângela Vieira Margarida Socó Otávio Augusto Tonico Laranjeira Vera Holtz Florisbela Mendonça (Belinha) Paloma Duarte Letícia Socó Maurício Mattar Rosalvo (Laudelino de Jesus Nogueira) Guilherme Fontes Josias Junqueira Patrícia França Lucilene Barbosa Marcos Winter Arnaldo Mendonça (Nado) Pedro Paulo Rangel Mudinho Totia Meirelles Cacilda Mário Borges Joca Mendonça Renata Dutra Fabiana Mendonça Eduardo Galvão Dr. José Otávio Tatiana Issa Maria do Socorro Socó Norton Nascimento Frei Eusébio Oswaldo Loureiro Delegado Romildo Galvão Alexia Dechamps Valdete Isabel Fillardis Marialva Luciana Coutinho Jaciara Lúcia Alves Fafá Badaró Cininha de Paula Zizi Badaró Ricardo Blat Emiliano Carlos Vereza Dr. Pestana Tamara Taxman Clotilde Tato Gabus Mendes Vadeco Marilu Bueno Dagmar Marcelo Faria Maninho Junqueira Bernadeth Lyzio Elisa Renata Lima Dalva Junqueira Carlos Gregório Michel Renault Tonico Pereira Chico Veloso Estelita Bell Maria Chupeta Ariel Coelho Irana Mário Lago Frei Luiz Fernanda Lobo Helô Denise Milfont Bruna Valter Santos Juvenal Cleyde Blota Creusa David Brasil Gisele Fátima Freire Marieta Rodolfo Bottino promoter ==References== ==External links== * *O Fim do Mundo no Memória Globo *O Fim do Mundo no Memória Globo Category:1996 Brazilian television series debuts Category:1996 Brazilian television series endings Category:1996 telenovelas Category:TV Globo telenovelas Category:Portuguese-language telenovelas Category:Apocalyptic television series