7556860	O'Connell Road	O'Connell Road is a New South Wales rural road linking Oberon to the regional highway hub of Bathurst, where several roads including Great Western Highway, Mid-Western Highway, Mitchell Highway and Bathurst-Ilford Road join. ==Route== O'Connell Road commences at the roundabout with Great Western Highway in Kelso, New South Wales (just east of Bathurst) and heads in a southeasterly direction, crossing the Fish River just north of O'Connell, and continuing southeast until it eventually terminates in Oberon. It is fully sealed over its entire length and of high enough standard to accommodate B-double trucks. In conjunction with Goulburn-Oberon Road from Hume Highway to Oberon, this scenic route provides a leisurely and surprisingly direct route between Bathurst and Goulburn. It is designated part of Tourist Route 1. ==History== The passing of the Main Roads Act of 1924State of New South Wales, An Act to provide for the better construction, maintenance, and financing of main roads; to provide for developmental roads; to constitute a Main Roads Board 10 November 1924 through the Parliament of New South Wales provided for the declaration of Main Roads, roads partially funded by the State government through the Main Roads Board (later the Department of Main Roads, and eventually Transport for NSW). Main Road No. 256 was declared along this road on 8 August 1928, from the intersection with Great Western Highway near Bathurst to Oberon (and continuing southwards via Taralga to the intersection with Hume Highway at Goulburn); with the passing of the Main Roads (Amendment) Act of 1929State of New South Wales, An Act to amend the Main Roads Act, 1924-1927; to confer certain further powers upon the Main Roads Board; to amend the Local Government Act, 1919, and certain other Acts; to validate certain payments and other matters; and for purposes connected therewith. 8 April 1929 to provide for additional declarations of State Highways and Trunk Roads, this was amended to Main Road 256 on 8 April 1929. The Department of Main Roads, which had succeeded the MRB in 1932, truncated the northern end of Main Road 256 to Oberon, and extended the western end of Main Road 253 over it instead, from Oberon to Bathurst, on 13 February 1934. The passing of the Roads Act of 1993State of New South Wales, An Act to make provision with respect to the roads of New South Wales; to repeal the State Roads Act 1986, the Crown and Other Roads Act 1990 and certain other enactments; and for other purposes. 10 November 1924 updated road classifications and the way they could be declared within New South Wales. Under this act, O'Connell Road today is declared part of Main Road 253, from Bathurst to Oberon (and continuing eastwards via the Jenolan Caves and Hampton to the intersection with Great Western Highway at Hartley). ==Major intersections== ==See also== * Highways in Australia * List of highways in New South Wales * Fish River ==References== Category:Highways in Australia Category:Oberon Council